---
layout: single-page
icon: fa-book
title: Student lectures abstracts
---

## From London to Msida - A Decade of ICPS
### [Markus Karppinen](karppinen.markus@gmail.com)

Since I was a freshman attending my first ICPS in London in 2007, this conference has held a special place in my heart; the people, the places, and the parties! From the tent sauna driven all the way from Finland to Poland, to claiming a whole Croatian street filled with bars as our own, I bring you an introspective and recollection from the view of a normal attender, with injections of presumed insight into how to keep a gathering of hundreds of physicists happy, fed and entertained. Come join me on a trip down memory lane to round up my ICPS career!

## Gravity - It can be derived from matter!
### [Mr. Maximilian Düll](maximilian.duell@fau.de)
Einstein postulated the dynamics of gravity by writing down the theory of General Relativity in 1915. With the dynamics, one gets the kinematics of spacetime for free. However, it was shown in the 1970's by Kuchar et al that the other way round is actually far more convenient. By specifing the kinematics of a spacetime carrying a Lorentzian metric -- that is, saying how three-dimensional hypersurfaces carrying physical data evolve -- one can fully derive the gravitational Lagrangian from General Relativity. The only question remains how to arrive at the kinematics of spacetime. This question was answered by Schuller et al in recent years. The kinematics of spacetime determined by the matter present on the spacetime. This matter does not necessarily need to be from the Standard Model of Particle Physics. Rather, any matter theory that is predicitive and canonically quantizable is allowed. That means, a matter model has to allow basic physics, namely well-posed time evolution and having a corresponding quantum theory of matter. Then, the kinematics of the corresponding spacetime are settled. Based on the concept of geometrodynamics by Wheeler et al, Schuller et al then were able to show how to find the dynamics of spacetime and thus gravity as the solution of a set of partial differential equations. In my talk, I will show the main results regarding the matter input into the kinematics of spacetime as well as the way from the kinematics to the gravitational dynamics. In the end, I will give a first glimpse at possible physical examples for new gravitational dynamics.

## What Makes a Flute a Flute? A Mathematical Analysis of Timbre
### [Danielle Harper](danielle.harper@meduniwien.ac.at)
Musical instruments all have their own, distinctive sounds. Even when they appear to be playing the same note (or emitting the same frequency), humans are capable of distinguishing which instrument they hear. In this study, three main instruments have been selected (flute, clarinet and violin) and their audible differences have been explored and explained by physics. Firstly, a recording of a single note played by a selected instrument was taken. Then by taking a Fourier Transform of the resulting sound spectrum, we see the true frequencies which are produced by the instrument. As an example, in the Western music scale the musical note A4 corresponds to a frequency of 440 Hz and yet the spectrum shows many more peaks than one at this frequency. Upon seeing this, it becomes clear why it is so difficult to produce digital music which can truly replicate these instruments. A spectral analysis was also conducted on notes from Sibelius software as an example and their differences compared to that of a real instrument. There are some clear similarities between the spectra of the “real” musical instrument and the artificially created one, however there is still something which, to the ear, sounds different. In addition, this analysis was also carried out on the progression of a single note as it is played. Through time, the frequency spectrum shifts, typically beginning and ending with only the dominant frequency. When changing between instruments, this characteristic shift changes again. All of these things combined contribute to the set of subconscious criteria which humans use to determine which instrument they hear. The knowledge of such phenomena allows us to not only to work towards the creation of digital music, but also to appreciate the mathematical complexity of something as “simple” as music. 
